===== PAGE 1 =====
DISCRIMINATIONAGAINSTPERSONSWITHDISABILITIESPROHIBITION)ACT,2018
EXPANARORYMEMORANDUM
ThisActprovidesfor thefullintegration ofpersonswith disabilities into the society and establishes theNational
Commission forPersonswithDisabilities andvests the Commission with theresponsibilities for their education,
healthcare,social,economic and civil rights.
===== PAGE 2 =====
DISCRIMINATIONAGAINSTPERSONSWITHDISABILITIES(PROHIBITION)ACT,

ArrangementofSections
Section:
PARTI-PROHIBITIONOFDISCRIMINATION,ANDAWARENESSPROGRAMMES
1.Prohibition of discrimination and penalty.
2.Awareness programmes.
PARTII-ACCESSIBILITYOFPHYSICALSTRUCTURE
3.Right of access topublicpremises.
4.Accessibility aids in public building.
5.Accessibility to roads,side-walk and special facilities.
6.
TransitoryPeriod.
7.
Building plan.
8.Complaint ofinaccessibility.
PARTIII-ROADTRANSPORTATION
9.Goods, services and facilities.
10.Accessibility ofvehicles.
11.Provision of facilities to persons with disabilities.
12.Reserved spaces.
PARTIV-SEAPORTS,RAILWAYSANDAIRPORTFACILITIES
13.Seaports and railways.
14.Assistive service and airline.
15.Special safety briefing of persons with disabilities.
PARTV-LIBERTY,RIGHTSTOEDUCATION,HEALTHANDFIRSTCONSIDERATION
INQUEUES,ACCOMODATIONANDINEMERGENCIES
16.Prohibitionof use ofpersonswith disabilities in solicitingfor alms and penalty.
17.Righttofree education.
18.Inclusiveness ofeducation.
19.Subsidised educationfor special education personnel.
20.Appropriate mode of education forpersons with disabilities.
21.Free healthcare.
22.Certificate of disability.
23.Unlawful procurement ofcertificateof disability.
===== PAGE 3 =====
24.Provision of special communication at hospitals.
25.Situation ofriskand humanitarian emergencies.
26.Service at queues.
27.Accommodation.
PARTVI-OPPORTUNITYFOREMPLOYMENTANDPARTICIPATIONINPOLITICS
ANDPUBLICLIFE
28.Equal right towork.
29.Opportunityforemployment.
30.Participation in politics.
PARTVII-ESTABLISHMENTOFTHENATIOANLCOMMISSIONFORPERSONSWITH
DISABILITES
31.EstablishmentofNational CommissionforPersonswithDisabilities.
32.Establishment ofmembership of the Governing Council.
33.Proceedings of the Council.
34.Tenure of office.
35.Cessation ofoffice.
36.Allowances ofmembers.
37.Powersof theCouncil.
38.Functions of the Commission.
39.Powersofthe Commission.
PARTVIII-APPOINTMENTANDDUTIESOFTHEEXECUTIVESECRETARYAND
OTHER STAFF
40.Appointment and duties of the Executive Secretary of the Commission.
41.Staff of the Commissionand theirremuneration.
42.Appointment and secondmentfrompublic service.
43.The structure of the Commission.
44.Pension and gratuity.
45.FundsoftheCommission.
46.Power to accept gifts.
47.Power toborrovr.
48.Annual estimate and expenditure.
49.Audit.
50. Annual report.
51.Power to acquire land.
===== PAGE 4 =====
ABill
For
An Act to provide for the full integration of persons with disabilities into the society,establish theNational
Commission for People with Disabilities and vest in the Commission the responsibilities for their education,
health care, social, economic and civil rights; and for related matters.
Commencement.
ENACTEDby theNational Assembly of theFederalRepublic of Nigeria -
PARTI-PROHIBITIONOFDISCRIMINATION,ANDAWARENESSPROGRAMMES
1.
(1)Apersonwith disability shall not be discriminated against on the ground of his disability
Prohibitionof
discrimination
and penalty.
(2)Aperson who contravenes subsection (1),commits an offence and is liableon conviction
to, if the person is -
(a) abody corporate,a fine ofN1,000,000;and
(b)an individual, a fine of N100,000 or sixmonths imprisonment orboth.
(3)Notwithstanding theprosecution,conviction or otherwise of anyperson for any offence
under thisAct,the person against whom the crime or wrong is committedmay maintain
a civil action against the person committing the offence or causing the injury,without
prejudice toany conviction or acquittal.
2.
The Federal Ministry of Information shall make provisions for promotion of awareness Awareness
regarding the-
programmes.
(a)rights,respect and dignity of persons with disabilities;and
(b) capabilities,achievements and contributions of persons with
disabilities to the society.
===== PAGE 5 =====
PARTII-ACCESSIBILTYOFPHYSICALSTRUCTURE
Right of access
Apersonwith disabilityhas theright to access thephysical environment and buildings on an
3.
topublic
equalbasiswithothers.
premises.
A public building shall be constructed with the necessary accessibility aids such as liftsAccessibility
4.
aidsin public
(where necessary),ramps and any other facility that shall make them accessible to and usable
building.
by personswith disabilities.
Road side-walks,pedestrian crossings and all other special facilities as set out in the First Accessibility to
5.
hroads side-walks
Schedulemade forpublicuse shall bemade accessible to and usable bypersons with
and special
disabilities including those on wheelchairs and the visually impaired.
facilities.
FirstSchedule.
Transitory
From thedateof thecommencementof thisAct,there shall be a transitoryperiod of five
6.
Period.
years within which all public buildings and structures,whether immovable,movable or
automobile,which were inaccessible to persons with disabilities shall be modified to be
accessible to and usable bypersonswith disabilities including those onwheelchairs.
7.
to ensure that the plan conformswith the building code.
(2)Agovernment or government agency,body or individual responsibleforthe approval of
buildingplans shall not approve theplan of apublicbuilding if theplan doesnotmake
provisionfor accessibilityfacilities in linewith thebuilding code.
(3)Anofficerwho approves or directs the approvalof a buildingplan that contravenes the
building code,commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine of at least
N1,00o,000 or a termof imprisonment of twoyears or both.
Complaint of
(1)Subject tosection7,in the eventofthe existenceofastateofinaccessibilityorbarrier to
8.
inaccessibility.
access of a person with disability to an environment that he has a right or duty to access,
hemay,without prejudice tohisright to seekredress ncourt,notify therelevant authority
in charge of the environment of the existence of the state of inaccessibility or barrier to
accessibility of the environment,and therelevant authorityin charge shall takeimmediate
and necessary steps to remove the barrier and make the environment accessible to the
person with disability.
(2)A relevant authority in charge that receives the notice in subsection (1) but fails to comply,
commits an offence and is liable onconviction,if it is-
(a)a corporate body,N10,000 damages payable to the affected
person for each day of default;or
===== PAGE 6 =====
PARTII-ACCESSIBILTYOFPHYSICALSTRUCTURE
A person with disabilityhas theright to access the physical environment and buildings onanRight of access
3.
to public
equal basiswithothers.
premises.
Accessibility
Apublic building shall be constructed with the necessary accessibility aids such as lifts
4.
aids in public
(where necessary),ramps and any otherfacility that shall make them accessible to and usable
building.
bypersonswith disabilities.
Road side-walks,pedestrian crossings and all other special facilities as set out in the First Accessibility to
5.
roads side-walks
Schedulemade for public use shall be made accessible to and usable bypersons with
and special
facilities.
disabilities including those on wheelchairs and thevisually impaired.
First Schedule.
Transitory
From thedateof the commencementof thisAct,there shall bea transitoryperiod of five
6.
Period.
years within which all public buildings and structures,whether immovable,movable or
automobile,which were inaccessible to persons with disabilities shall be modified to be
accessible to and usable bypersons with disabilities including those on wheelchairs.
(1)Before erecting any public structure,its plan shall be scrutinisedby the relevant authorityBuilding plan.
7.
toensure that theplan conforms with thebuilding code.
(2)Agovernment orgovernment agency,body orindividualresponsiblefor the approval of
building plans shall not approve the plan of a public building if the plan does not make
provision for accessibilityfacilities in linewith thebuilding code.
(3)An officerwho approves or directs the approval of a buildingplan that contravenes the
building code,commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine of at least
N1,00o,000 or a term of imprisonment of twoyears or both.
Complaintof
(1)Subject to section7,in the event of the existenceof a state of inaccessibility orbarrier to
8.
inaccessibility.
access of a person with disability to an environment that he has a right or duty to access,
he may,without prejudicetohisright toseekredressncourt,notifytherelevant authority
in charge of the environmentof the existenceof the stateofinaccessibilityorbarrier to
accessibility of the environment,and therelevant authorityin charge shall take immediate
and necessary steps to remove the barrier and make the environment accessible to the
person with disability.
(2)A relevant authority in charge that receives the notice in subsection(1) but fails to comply,
commits anoffence and is liable on conviction,if it is-
(a)a corporate body,N10,000 damages payable to the affected
personfor eachdayofdefault;or
===== PAGE 7 =====
(b)an individual,N5,000 damages payable to the affected person
each dayof default or sixmonthsimprisonment orboth.
PARTIII-ROADTRANSPORTATION
9.
(1)A person,whowhetherforpayment rnot,providesgoodsor services,ormakesfacilitiesGoodsservices
and facilities.
available, shall not discriminate against another person with disability by-
(a)refusing to provide those goods or services ormake those
facilities available to him;
(b)the termsorconditionsonwhich theproviderprovides those
goods or services ormakes those facilities available tohim;or
() themanner in which theprovider provides those goods or
services ormakes thosefacilities available tohim.
10.
(1) Government transport services providers shall make provisions for lifts,ramps and other Accessbility of
vehicles.
accessibility aids to enhance the accessibility of their vehicles,parks and bus stop to
persons with disabilities including those onwheel chairs.
(2)Every publicvehicleshall havefunctional audible andvisual display of theirdestination
withinfiveyearsfrom thecommencementof thisAct.
11.
Provisionof
(1)Transportserviceproviders shallmakeprovisions for lifts,ramps and other accessibility
facilities to
aids to enhance the accessibility of their vehicles,parks and bus stops to persons with
personswith
disabilitiesincluding those on wheelchairs.
disabilities.
(2)Lifts,ramps and all other accessibility equipment in or forvehicles,and atparksorbus
stops shall be maintained in operational condition.
(3)There shall beregular and frequentmaintenance of all accessibility aids and equipment,
and defective ones shall be promptly repaired or replaced.
(4)Before a person with disability boards or alights from a vehicle,the driver shall ensure
that thevehiclecomesto a stop.
(5)When a person with disability intends to board a vehicle,all otherintendingpassengers
shallwaitforhimtoboardbeforethem.
12.
(1)At public parking lots,suitable spaces shall beproperlymarked and reserved for persons Reserved spaces.
with disabilities.
(2)Forapersonwithdisability tobe entitled to theuseof thereserved spacein subsection
(1),his car shall have been properly identified with the necessary insignia.
===== PAGE 8 =====
(3)Aperson,organisation or corporate body in control ofa publicparkinglotwhofails to
provide for the reserved spaces in subsection (l),commits an offence and is liable on
conviction toafineofN1,0ooforeachdayofdefault.
(4)A person without disability who parks a vehicle in the reserved space in subsection(1),
commitsanoffence and is liable on conviction to a fineof N5,000.
(5)A person who intentionally obstructs the reserved space in subsection (l) commits an
offence and is liable on conviction to afineofN5,000.
(6) Subsection (4) does not apply if a person with disability is a passenger in the vehicle.
PARTIV-SEAPORTS,RAILWAYSANDAIRPORTFACILITIES
13.
(1) Seaports facilities and vessels shall be made accessible to persons with disabilities.
Seaports and
railways.
(2)Railway stations,trains andfacilities in the trains shall bemade accessible topersons with
disabilities.
(3)The transitoryprovision containedinsection6 shall applyto theprovisionsof thissection.
14.
Assistive service
(1) All airlines operating in Nigeria shall-
and airline.
（a)ensure the accessibility of their aircraft to persons with
disabilities;
(b)make available presentable and functional wheelchairs for the
conveyanceofpersonswithdisabilitieswhoneed them toand
from the aircraft;
()ensure thatpersonswith disabilities are assisted togeton and off
board in safety andreasonable comfort; and
boarding and disembarking from the aircraft.
(2)All airports shall make availablefor the conveyanceof personswith disabilities whoneed
presentable and functional assistive and protective devices to andfrom the aircraft.
15.
Any general information shall be translated into the accessible format appropriate to theSpecial safety
briefingof
person with disabilitypresent.
person with
disabilities.
===== PAGE 9 =====
PART V-LIBERTY,RIGHT TO EDUCATION,HEALTH AND FIRST
CONSIDERATIONINQUEUES,ACCOMODATIONANDINEMERGENCIES
16.
(1)Aperson shall not-
Prohibition of
use ofpersons
(a) employ,use orinvolvea person with disabilityinbegging;
with disabilities
in solicitingfor
alms and
(b) parade persons with disabilities in public with intention of
penalty.
solicitingfor alms;or
(c) use condition of disability as a guise for the purpose of begging
in public.
(2)A person who contravenes subsection (1) commits an offence and is liable on conviction
to a fine of N100,000 ora term of six months imprisonment or both.
17.
(1)A person with disability shall have an unfettered right to education without discriminationRight to free
education.
or segregation in any iorm.
(2)A person with disability is entitled tofree education to secondary school level.
(3)The Commission shall provide educational assistive devices.
18.
(1)All public schools,whether primary,secondary or tertiary shall berun to beinclusive ofInclusiveness of
cducation.
and accessible topersonswith disabilities,accordingly every school shall have-
(a) at least a trained personnel to cater for the educational
development ofpersons with disabilities;and
(b) special facilities for the effective education ofpersons with
disabilities.
(2)Braille,signlanguage and other skills for communicating withpersons with disabilities
shall form part of the curricula ofprimary,secondary and tertiary institutions.
19.1
The education of special educationpersonnel shall be highly subsidised.
Subsidised
educationfor
special education
personnel.
20.
Government shall ensure that the education of personswith disabilities,particularlychildren,
Appropriate
modeof
who areblind,deaforwithmultipledisabilities,isdeliveredinthemost appropriatelanguage,
cducationfor
mode and meansof communication for theindividual,and in environments which maximise
personswith
academicand socialdevelopment.
disabilities.
===== PAGE 10 =====
(1) Government shall guarantee that persons with disabilities have unfettered access to Free healthcare.
21.
adequatehealthcarewithout discrimination on thebasisof disability.
(2)A personwith mental disability shall be entitled tofreemedical and health service in all
public institutions.
Certificate of
(1)A person with mental disability shall obtain a Permanent Certificate of Disability from
22.
Disability.
theCommission.
(2)If a doctor suspects disability in thecourse of treatment of a person who before wasnot a
person with disability,the doctor may with the approval of the Commission,issue a
TemporaryCertificateofDisabilitywhich shall lastfornotlonger than180days.
(3)Ifthe stateof disabilitypersistsbeyond 180 days,the Commissionon therecommendation
of a doctor,shall issue the person a Permanent Certificate of Disability which shall last
for as long as the state of the disabilitypersists.
(4)A person issued with a Permanent Certificate of Disability is entitled to all rights and
privileges under thisAct.
eUnlawful
A person who unlawfully issues or obtains a Certificate of Disability,commits an offence
23.
procurementof
and is liable on conviction to afine of N200,000 or imprisonment for a term of one year or
certificateof
disability.
both.
Provisionof
A publichospital where a person with communicational disabilities ismedically attended to
24.
special
communication
shall makeprovisionfor special communication.
at hospitals.
In all situationsofrisk,violence,emergencies and theoccurrences ofnatural disasters, the siuation of risk
25.
and humanitarian
Government shall take all necessary steps to ensure the safety and protection of personswith
emergencies.
disabilities takingcognisance of theirpeculiar vulnerability.
(1) In queues, persons with disabilities shall be given first consideration and, as much as Service at
26.
queues.
possible,be attended to outside the queue.
(2)Apersonwho contravenes thissectioncommits anoffence and is liable on conviction to
a fineofN50,000.00ora term of sixmonthsimprisonmentorboth.
If accommodation is being provided by schools for their students,employers for their Accommodation.
27.
employees, service providers for their customers,organisations for their members,
disabilitiesshall begiven firstconsideration.
===== PAGE 11 =====
PARTVI-OPPORTUNITYFOREMPLOYMENTANDPARTICIPATIONINPOLITICS
ANDPUBLICLIFE
28.
(1)A person with disability has the right to work on an equal basis with others and this Equal right to
work.
includes theright to opportunity togain a living by workfreely chosen or accepted in a
labour market andworkenvironment thatis open.
(2)A person who contravenes subsection (1),commits an offence and is liable on conviction
tonominal damages of a minimum ofN250,000payable to the affectedpersonwith
disability.
(3) Where a company contravenes subsection (1)-
(a) the company commits an offence and is liable to nominal
damagesofaminimum ofN500,000payableto theaffected
personwith disability;and
(b) any principal officer of the company involved in theviolation is
liable toN50,000 damages payable to the affected person with
disability.
29.
All employers of labourin public organisations shall, asmuch aspossiblehavepersonswith Opportunity for
employment.
disabilitiesconstitutingatleast5%of their employment.
30.
(1）Personswithdisabilitiesshallbeencouraged tofullypaticipatenpoliticsand publiclifePartiipationin
politics.
(2) Government shall actively promote an environment in which persons with disabilities can
effectively and fully participate in-
(a) the conduct of public affairs without discrimination;
(b) non-governmental organisations and associations concerned
with the public and political life of the country; and
()activities and administration of political parties.
PARTVII-ESTABLISHMENTOFTHENATIONALCOMMISSIONFORPERSONS
WITHDISABILITIES
31.
(1) There is established the National Commission for Persons with Disabilities (in this Act Establishment of
National
referred to as“the Commission") tobe placed under thePresidency.
Commissionfor
persons with
disabilities.
===== PAGE 12 =====
(2) The Commission-
(a)is a body corporatewith-
(i) perpetual succession,
(ii) a common seal; and
(b) may sue and be sued in its corporate name; and
(c)may acquire,hold and dispose of property,movable or
immovable.
(3)The head office of the Commission shall be in theFederal Capital Territory,Abuja.
32.
(1) There is established a Governing Council for the Commission (in this Act referred to as Establishment
and membership
thethe Council")which shall conduct the affairs of the Commission.
of the Governing
Council.
(2)The Council shall consist of-
(a) a part time chairman;
(b)onepersonwith disability from eachgeopolitical zone;
() a representative each from the Federal Ministry of -
(i) Education,
(ii) Health,
(ii) Sports,
(iv) Women Affairs,
(v) Housing,
(vi) Transport,
(vi) Environment,
(vii) Labour and Productivity,
(ix) Justice, and
(ix) Finance; and
(d)arepresentative eachfrom the National HumanRights Commission and theNational
Planning Commission.
===== PAGE 13 =====
(3)The Chairman of the Council and one representative each from the6geo-political zones,
shall be appointedby thePresident subject to theconfirmation of theSenate.
33.
The supplementary provisions set out in the Second Schedule to this Act shall have effectProceedings of
the Council.
with respect to the proceedings of the Council and the other matters contained in the
Schedule.
Second Schedule.
34.
The Chairman and members of the Council shall each hold office-
Tenureofoffice.
(a)for a term of four years andmaybe re-appointed for a further
term of fouryears andno more;and
(b)on such terms and conditions asmaybe specified in their letters
ofappointment.
35.(1) A person ceases to hold office as a member of the Council if he-
Cessation of
office.
(a)becomesbankrupt,or compounds with his creditors;
(b)is convicted of a felony or any offence involving dishonesty or
fraud;
(c) is disqualified of his professional qualification;
(d) is guilty ofa serious misconduct in relation to his duties; or
(e)resignshis appointment by a letter addressed to thePresident.
(2)If amember of the Council ceases toholdofficefor any reasonwhatsoever before the
expiration of the term for which he is appointed,another person representing the same
interest as thatmember shall be appointed to the Council for theunexpired term.
(3)Amemberof theCouncil shall beremoved by thePresidenton therecommendation of
the Council if he is satisfied that it is not in the interest of the Commission or thepublic
that the member continues in that office.
36.
Members of the Council shall be paid allowances and expenses as the Governmentmay directAlowances of
members.
37.The Council shall have power to-
Power of the
Council.
(a) manage and superintend over the affairs of the Commission;
(b) make rules and regulations for the effective running of the
Commission;
===== PAGE 14 =====
()establish and promote inclusive schools,vocational and
rehabilitation centres for the development of persons with
disabilities;
(k) liaisewith thepublic andprivate sectors and other bodies to
ensure that thepeculiarinterestsofpersonswithdisabilities are
taken into consideration in every government policy,programme
and activity;
(l) issue insignia ofidentification with persons with disabilities;
（m)in collaboration with other relevant government agencies and
professional bodiesinthebuildingindustry,enforce compliance
ofpublic buildings codes and impose necessary sanctions and
make appropriate orders;
（n)receive complaints ofpersonswith disabilities on theviolation
of their rights;
(o) support an individual's right to seek redress in court,
investigation,prosecution or sanctioning,in appropriate cases,
the violation of theprovision of thisAct;
(p)ensure research,development and educationon disability issues
and disabled persons;
（q)collaborate with themedia tomakeinformation availablein
accessibleformatforpersonswith disabilities;and
(r) procure assistive devicesfor all disability types.
Powersofthe
39.
(1) The Commission shall have power to do any lawful thing,which will facilitate carrying
Commission.
out of itsfunctions and in particularmay-
(a) enterintocontractfor the education andwelfare ofpersonswith
disabilities;
(b)purchase or acquire any assets,business or property considered
necessary for the proper conduct ofitsfunctions;
（)sell,let,lease ordispose ofany ofitsproperty;
===== PAGE 15 =====
(d) undertake or sponsor research where necessary for the
performance ofitsfunctions;and
（e) train managerial, technical or other category of staff for the
purpose ofrunning the affairs of the Commission.
(2)The power conferrea on the Commissionmay be exercised by it or through any of its
employees or agent authorisedin that behalf by the Commission.
(3) The Commission shall notbe subject to a direction,control or suspension by any other
authority orpersonin theperformance ofitsfunctionsunder thisActexcept thePresident.
PARTVII-APPOINTMENTANDDUTIESOFTHEEXECUTIVESECRETARYAND
OTHERSTAFF
Appointment
(1) There shall be an Executive Secretary for the Commission who shall-
and duties of the
Executive
(a)have such qualification and experience as appropriate for a
Secretary of the
personrequired toperform thefunctionsof thatoffice;
Commission.
(b)be apersonwith disability;and
(c)beresponsible to the Council for the execution of thepolicies
and administration of the daily affairs of the Commission.
41.
eStaffofthe
The Council shall appoint for the Commission such number of employees asmay,in the
commission and
opinionof the Council,beexpedient andnecessary for theproper and efficientperformance
their
of thefunctions of the Commission.
remuneration.
Appointment and
42.
(1)The Council may appoint for the Commission,either directly orby secondment from any
secondment from
PublicService of theFederation,suchnumberofemployees asmay,in the opinion of the
public service.
Council,berequired to assist the Commission in the performance of any ofitsfunctions
under this Act.
2)Theperson seconded under this section,mayelecttobe transferred to theservice of the
Commission,and any previous service theperson may haverendered inthePublicService
shall count as service to the Commission for thepurpose ofanypension subsequently
payablebytheCommission.
43.
Structure of the
There shall be established,in thehead officeof the Commission,such departments as may
Commission.
be deemed necessary for the effective and efficient functioning of the Commission.
===== PAGE 16 =====
44.
The staffof theCommission areentitled toension,gratuity,and anyotherretirement benefitPension and
gratuity.
in accordance with thePensionReform Act.
ActNo.4,2014.
45.
1Fundsofthe
(1)The Commissionshall establish and maintain a fund intowhich shallbepaid and credited
Commission.
(a) all subventions and budgetary allocations from the Federal
Government of Nigeria;and
(b) such money as may be granted to the Commission by anybody
orinstitution within or outsideNigeria.
(2) The Commission shall defray all expenditures incurred by it including-
(a) cost of administration;
(b)payment of salaries,fees,or other remuneration,allowances,
pensions andgratuitiespayabletomembers and employeesof
the Commission;and
(c) anything done in connection with any of its functions.
(3) The Council shall cause the account of the Commission to be audited quarterly and shall
be externallyauditedonce everyyear.
46.
(1) The Commission may accept gift of land, money or other property on such terms and Power to accept
gifts.
conditions,if any,as may be specified by the person or organisationmaking thegif,
provided such terms andconditions arenot inconsistentwith anyprevailing law.
(2)The Commission shall not accept any gift if the conditions attached areinconsistent with
thefunctionsof the Commission under thisAct.
47.
The Commission may borrow such money as it may require to execute or complete some Power to borrow.
special projectsof theCommission.
48.
Annual estimate
(1)TheCommissionshall--
and expenditure.
(a) cause tobekept accounts and records of transaction and affairs
of the Commission;and
(b) ensure that all payments out of its Fund are correctly made and
properly authorised.
===== PAGE 17 =====
(2)The Commission shall ensure that adequate control is maintained over the assets of,or in
the custody of,the Commission and over its incurring of liabilities.
Audit.
(1)The Auditor-General for theFederation shall-
49.
（a) inspect and audit the account and records of financial
transactionsofthe Commission;
(b)inspect records relating to assetsof the Commission;and
()draw theattentionof theSecretarytotheGovernmentofthe
Federation to any irregularities disclosed by theinspection and
audit.
(2)The Auditor-General for the Federation may dispense with all or anypart of detailed
(3)The auditor or an officer authorised by him is entitled at all reasonable time to a full and
free access to all account records, documents and papers of the Commission relating
directly or indirectly to the receiptorpaymentofmoneyby the Commission or to the
acquisition received,custody or disposal of assetsby the Commission.
Annual report.
50.
The Commission shall submit-
(a) an annual report ofits activities to the office of the Secretary to
theGovernmentof theFederationnotlater than30thJuneof
each financial year;and
(b)a copy ofits audited accounts and a copy of the annual report to
theNational Assembly.
The Commission may, subject to the Land Use Act, acquire anyland for the purpose of Power to acquire
51.
land.
performing itsfunctions.
Cap.LS,LFN,
2004.
PARTIX—MISCELLANEOUSPROVISIONS
Serviceof
A notice, summons or other documents required or authorised to be served upon the
52.
documents.
Commission under theprovisionsof thisAct,any other lawor enactmentmaybeserved by
deliveringit to theExecutiveSecretaryor by sending it by registeredpost and addressing it
to theExecutiveSecretaryat theheadofficeofthe Commission.
Paymentof
53.
judgment debt.
shall bepaidfrom theFund of theCommission.
===== PAGE 18 =====
54.A member of the Council, the Executive Secretary, any officer or employee of the Indemnityof
officers.
Commission shall bendemnifiedagainst anyproceeding,whethercivilorcriminal,nwhich
judgement is givenin hisfavour orinwhich is acquitted,if any such proceeding isbrought
againsthim in hiscapacity as a memberof the Council,theExecutive Secretary,officeror
the employeeoftheCommission.
(1) To be entitled to the damages specifically provided in thisAct,it shall be sufficient for aWaivers of proof
55.
of special
plaintifforclaimant,asthecasemaybe,inacourtproceedingtoprove theviolationof the
damages.
relevantsectionof thisActwithoutspecificproof of damages.
(2) Nothing in this Act shall prevent a court from accessing and awarding general and special
damagesinaddition to thenormal damagesprovidedforin thisAct.
56.
The Council maymake regulations for the purpose of carrying out or giving full effect to theRegulations.
provisions of this Act.
PARTX-INTERPRETATION
Interpretation.
57.
In this Act-
“accessibility aidincludes any fixture and device that aids accessibility;
"accommodation”in the context ofhousing,includesresidential or business accommodation;
“assistive device”means any device that assists,increases or improves the functional
capabilitiesofpersonswith disabilities;
"Commission”means National Commission for People with Disabilities established under
this Act;
"commission agent”means the person who does work for the Commission as its agent and
who isremunerated,whetherinwhole orin part by the Commission;
"disabled"means having a disability;
"disability”includes long term physical,mental,intellectual or sensory impairment whichin
interaction with various barriers may hinder full and effective participation in society on
equal basis with others;
"discrimination”means differential treatment and its verbs and infinite form,discriminate,to
discriminate have the corresponding signification;
“document”includes any bookregister or other record of information,however compiled,
record or stored;
===== PAGE 19 =====
“educational authority”means a body of persons administering an education institution;
“educational institution”means a school college,university or other institution at which
education or trainingisprovided;
"employee”includes applicant or prospective employee,commission agent, contract worker,
independent contractor;
"employer”includes prospective employer,principal and a person who engages or proposes
to engage a commission agent,contractworker orindependent contractor;
No.13,2010;
"function"includes duty;
“government employee”means a person whois appointed,employed orengaged in thepublic
serviceoforbyapublic authorityof theFederation,aState,theFederal CapitalTerritoryr
a local government,or holds an administrative office;
“personincludesnatural,artificial,juristic orjudicial persons,companies,enterprisesfirms,
organisations,association,government department,ministries,parastatals;
“person with disabilities”means-
(a)a person who has received Temporary orPermanent Certificate
ofDisability tohaveconditionwhich is expected to continue
permanently or for a considerable length of time which can
reasonably be expected to limit the person'sfunctional ability
substantially,but not limited to seeing, hearing,thinking,
ambulating,climbing,descending,lifting,grasping,rising,and
includesanyrelatedfunction or anylimitation duetoweakness
or significantly decreased endurance so thathe cannotperform
his everyday routine,living and working without significantly
increased hardship andvulnerability to everyday obstacles and
hazards;and
(b) a person with long term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory
impairmentwhich in interaction withvariousbarriersmayhinder
theirfull and effective participationin society on equal basiswith
others;
===== PAGE 20 =====
“premises”includes a structure,building,aircraft,vehicle,train or vessel;a place(whether
enclosed orbuilt onornot) and apartofpremises;
"President”meansPresident and Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of theFederal
Republic ofNigeria;
a buildingavailablefor theuseofmembersof thepublic;
“relativeinrelationtoa person,meansapersonwhoisrelated tothefirstmentioned person
by blood,marriage affinity or adoption;
“special communication” means special means (including sign language augmentative and
alternativecommunication) of communicatingwithperson with speech orhearing disability;
special facilities”means any provision whether movable orimmovable that enhances easy
access andenjoyment inpublicbuildingsbypersonswithdisabilitiessignificantly decreased
endurance so that he cannot perform his everyday routine,living and working without
significantlyincreased hardship andvulnerability to everyday obstacles and hazards;
“state”means each of theStateof theFederation,andincludes theFederal Capital Territory;
“student”in relation to an education institution,includes a candidate or applicant for
admission into that educational institution;
“undue hardship”means significant difficulty or expense,when considered in light of such
factorsas-
(a)thenature andcost of the accommodationneeded to takecare of
a disabled person'sspecial needs;
(b)theoverall financialresources of thefacilityor facilities
involvedin theprovisionofthereasonable accommodation and
(c)the effecton expenses and resources or the impact otherwiseof
such accommodation upon the operation of thefacility;
(d) theoverall financesof theperson or organisation having to deal
with person with disability,with the overall size ofhis or its
businesswithrespect to thenumberofitsemployees,thenumber,
type,and location of its facilities; and
（e)the type of operation or operations of such person or
organisation,including the composition, structure and function
===== PAGE 21 =====
of his or its workforce;the geographic,separateness,
administrative,orfiscalrelationshipofthefacilityorfacilitiesin
question to suchperson ororganisation.
Citation.
58.
This Act may be cited as the Discrimination Against Persons with Disabilities (Prohibition)
Act,2018.
===== PAGE 22 =====
Section5
First Schedule
Special Facilities
1.Wheel chairs,clearfloors or ground space onwheel chairs,wheel chair passage and turning pace
2.Crutches,guide canes etc
3.Hearing Aid
4. Curb ramps
5.Ramps
6.Handrails,grab bars
7.Stain-shopping stairs
8.Elevators orLifts
9.Windows
10.Entrance doors
11. Drinking fountains and water coolers
12.Toilet facilities
13.Door protective and re-opening devices manoeuvring entrances at doors
14.Parking spaces and passenger loading zones
15.Accessibleroutes includingwalk ways,halls,windows,aisles and spaces
16.Alarm-
(a) audible alarms;
(b)visual alarms;and
(c) auxiliary alarms
===== PAGE 23 =====
Second Schedule
Section33
SUPPLEMENTARYPROVISIONSRELATINGTOTHECOUNCIL
ProceedingsoftheCouncil
1.(1) Subject to this Act and section 27of theInterpretation Act,the Council may make standing
Cap.I23,LFN,
orders regulating its proceedings or those of any of its Committes.
2004.
(2)The quorum of the Council shall be the Chairman or theperson presiding at themeeting and
five other members of the Council,one ofwhom shall be an ex-officio member, and the
quorum of any committee of theCouncil shall be as determined by the Council.
2.(1) The Council shall meet whenever it is summoned by the Chairman and if the Chairman is
required to do sobynoticegiven tohimby at least eight othermembers,he shall summon a
meetingof theCouncil tobeheldwithin14daysfrom thedate onwhichthenoticewasgiven.
(2) Where the Council desires to obtain the advice of any person on aparticularmatter, the
Council may co-opt him to the Council for such period asit deemsfit,but a person who is in
attendance byvirtue of thisparagraph isnotentitled tovote at anymeeting of the Council and
shallnotcounttowardsaquorum.
3.(1)The Council may setup one ormore committees toperform,on behalf of the Council,such
functions as the Council may determine.
(2)A committee set up under paragraph(1) shall consider such number of persons as may be
determined by the Council and aperson shall hold officein the Committeein accordancewith
thetermsofhis appointment.
(3)A decision ofa committee of the Council isofno effect until it isconfirmed by the Council
4.(1) The affixing of the seal of the Commission shall be authenticated by the signatures of the
Chairman,ExecutiveSecretary or any othermember of the Council generally or specifically
authorisedby theCouncil to actforthatpurpose.
(2)A contract orinstrument,whichif made orexecuted by anypersonnot beinga bodycorporate
wouldnotberequired tobeunderseal,maybeexecuted onbehalf of the Commissionby the
Executive Secretary or any person generally authorised by the Council to act forthat purpose.
(3)A document purporting tobea document duly executed under the seal of the Commission
shall bereceived in evidence and shall,unless the contrary is proved,be presumed to be so
executed.
5.Thevalidity of anyproceedingof the Council or Committee shall not be adversely affected by a
===== PAGE 24 =====
Section5
First Schedule
Special Facilities
1.Wheel chairs,clearfloors orground space onwheel chairs,wheelchair passage and turning space
2.Crutches,guide canes etc
3.Hearing Aid
4. Curb ramps
5.Ramps
6.Handrails,grab bars
7.Stain-shopping stairs
8.Elevators orLifts
9. Windows
10.Entrance doors
11. Drinking fountains and water coolers
12.Toilet facilities
13.Door protective and re-opening devices manoeuvring entrances at doors
14.Parking spaces andpassengerloadingzones
15.Accessibleroutes including walk ways,halls,windows,aisles and spaces
16.Alarm-
(a) audible alarms;
(b)visual alarms;and
(c) auxiliary alarms
===== PAGE 25 =====
(a) vacancy in the membership of the Council or Committee;
(b) defect in the appointment of a member of the Council or Committee; or
(c)reason that a person not entitled to do so tookpart in the
proceedingsof the Council or Committee.
===== PAGE 26 =====
FORM1
Section 38(m)
COMPLIANCEORDER
Notice hasbeen taken of thefact thatyour Programme isnot inclusive of DisabilitiesIssues.
In particular:
This contravenes section38of Discrimination against Persons with Disabilities (Prohibition)Act,you are hereby
orderedtoimmediatelycomplywith theAct.
Takenote thatif,afterthreemonthsfromreceiptof thisorder,you stillremainindefault,youroperational licence
shall bewithdrawn.
Signed
===== PAGE 27 =====
FORM2
Section 22 (1)
CERTIFICATEOFPERMANENTDISABILITY
.of
This is to certify that
...was
.andfound tobepermanently incapacitated.
examined by me...
.on thisdayof
Signed
CERTIFICATEOFTEMPORARYDISABILITY
Section 22 (2)
Thisis tocertify that
of
and found tobe
...on this day of..
..wasexamined byme
temporarilyincapacitated.
Signed